Open standards in the web sites

 Preface

   This section of the manual will introduce you to using open standards in a web site.


 Open Standards and Internet

   Open standards are standards which are freely available for people to
   read and implement.  If a standard describes some technology that
   requires licensing some patents, it cannot be considered open, even if
   its text is freely availabe.  Open standards create a fair,
   competitive environment, encourages competition between vendors, and
   thus create an advantage to the consumer.

   Open technologies were essential to the Internet's popularity, and
   allowed them to conquer the competing proprietary technologies.  This
   openness created a global Internet hardware, software and service
   market.  Computer/information networks that existed before the spread
   of the Internet either switched to the Internet technologies (MSN,
   AOL), or got extinct (Compuserve).

   Domination of open standards enables the user to freely choose email
   server and client software, web servers, browsers and ignore the
   interoperability issues.


 Open standards of the WWW

   HTTP appeared in the early 1990-s as a collection of informal
   standards.  It was standardised by W3C in 1995 as HTML 2.0.  The
   standard has quite limited features by modern-day standards. 

   During the ensuing "browser wars", Netscape and Microsoft competed
   by adding unique features to their browsers, which resulted in
   divergent dialects of HTML and major incompatibilities among the
   leading browsers.  Most of the features added by the browser
   vendors were geared at making visual effects easier available, but
   that was not in line with the original idea of HTML 

   There were attempts to reconcile the differences by releasing the
   HTTP 3.2 and HTTP 4.0 standards.  The currently relevant standards,
   HTTP 4.01, and XHTML 1.1, promote separation of content and
   presentation, but still allow exact and visually intensive designs
   by providing the style information in a CSS document.


 Why bother with standards compliance on WWW?

   The main function of municipal web sites is information
   dissemination, so maximum accessibility is important.  Open
   standards will ensure the website is accessible to disabled people
   using speech generators or Braille terminals.  Additionally, the
   standards-compliant website will be easily accessable via
   smartphones, indexable by search systems, available to automated
   tools extracting information from the web site.

   Open standards provide equal opportunities to the users, as they do
   not lock in to any particular vendor.  Additionally, a standards
   compliant web site will be more future proof, as the standards will be 
   supported in the future, and the web sites employing non-standard
   features of the contemporary browsers can have to be correted.  The
   change of the technologies is so swift that these changes might be
   needed in several months.

 Testing standards conformance of LT and LV municipal web sites

   The 60 Lithuanian municipal web sites were tested for compliance
   with open standards.  There was just one (http://www.prienai.lt/)
   which has some parts compliant with HTTP and CSS specifications.
   6 sites used a standards-compliant CSS stylesheet.

   Out of the 30 Latvian municipal web sites tested, none used valid
   HTML, 7 used standards-compliant CSS, and 13 used CSS which was
   standards-compliant, but elicited warnings from the validator.

   These results are alarming, even more so considering that most of
   the web sites were created by contract by companies specialising
   in web technologies.  This means that contractors of municipalities
   did an unacceptable job.  Municipalities should require standards
   compliance from contractors creating their web sites.
